# Survey-Analysis-of-Ideologies-in-Twitter-Use
Project for Public Opinion Research
**Ideological Extremes and Moderates in Twitter Political Engagement**
	An estimated quarter of U.S. adults regularly receive news from Twitter, a major social media site that has become a prominent mediated space for entertainment, news consumption, and political engagement (Pew, 2021). Twitter’s blend of user-generated content and its strong presence of news agencies and political figures has established its role as a highly politicized platform, drawing extensive research in public opinion, political communication, and related areas.
	While 64% of U.S. adults report that Twitter helps them stay informed, and 53% say it exposes them to diverse opinions (Pew, 2021), studies suggest that Twitter often reinforces, rather than diversifies, users’ beliefs—a phenomenon commonly known as echo chambers or filter bubbles (Zhuravskaya, 2020).
	This study uses data from the American Trends Panel Wave 90, a nationally representative survey conducted by Pew Research Center in May 2021, which includes responses from 2,548 U.S. adults who are reported Twitter users. This survey captures participants’ perceptions, attitudes, and habits regarding Twitter, along with demographic and psychographic details, providing a valuable basis to study political engagement and cross-ideological content exposure on Twitter. 
**Literature Review
Polarization, Selected Exposure, and Motivated Reasoning**
	Social media users often exhibit behaviors that contribute to polarization, with selective exposure emerging as an extensively studied mechanism in the literature about polarization. Selective exposure is characterized by the tendency to selectively attend to information that aligns with existing political beliefs. For example, research has documented a clear blue-red divide in media preferences, with liberals favoring left-leaning news sources and conservatives preferring right-leaning content (Iyengar & Hahn, 2009). With the rising concern about the recommendation algorithms implemented by social media platforms, Bakshy et al. (2015) found that users’ individual choices largely drive the selective consumption of ideologically aligned content, despite algorithms left substantive room for cross-cutting content exposure by analyzing a large scale Facebook data of 10.1 million U.S. users and studied their news stories consumption. Choosing media that align with one’s political views contributes to increasing political polarization over time. Although the primary effect direction was that selective exposure increases polarization, Stroud (2010) analyzed the survey respondents’ media consumption patterns of National Annenberg Election Survey and expanded the findings by identifying the reverse link, which demonstrated a spiral effect of partisan selective exposure and polarization reinforcing each other. 
	Psychological theories, including cognitive dissonance and motivated reasoning, help explain why selective exposure persists. Cognitive dissonance states that individuals experience discomfort when they hold two incongruent thoughts, motivating them to reduce this dissonance if they want to restore balance (Festinger, 1957; Kunda, 1990). The strength of dissonance also matters. Mestzger (2020) found that selective exposure is mostly likely when dissonance is moderate; higher dissonance, however, may actually lead to attitudinal changes. Motivated reasoning further elaborates on the psychological basis of selective exposure by emphasizing that people’s motivations can shape their beliefs and judgements (Bolsen, et al., 2013). According to this theory, partisanship can drive individuals to interpret information in ways that align with their political loyalty (Lavine et al., 2012). On Twitter, this partisan-driven reasoning may affect how users engage with political content, with stronger ideologies potentially leading to more closed attitudes towards opposing views. These insights give rise the the following hypothesis:
H1: Twitter users with strong ideologies are more likely to be exposed to congruent information to their ideological positions compared to ideological moderates.
**Homophily and Cross-ideological Interactions**
	Social media research from a network perspective emphasizes homophily—the tendency of individuals to connect with those similar to themselves—as a significant driver of polarization. Twitter users have been shown to cluster around like-minded groups, reducing exposure to ideologically diverse perspectives (Halberstam & Knight, 2016). Specifically, one study uses Twitter data, including a comprehensive network of Twitter users and their connections, alongside scrapping political tweets over seven months. It indicates that Democrats exhibit higher levels of political homophily overall, though Republicans following official Republican accounts display even stronger partisan homophily (Colleoni, et al., 2014). 
	This inclination towards forming ideologically homogeneous networks has raised concerns over political segregations online. Although some studies indicate that Twitter uses tend to be highly ideologically segregated and rarely exposed to cross-ideological content (Himelboim, 2013), others have found no difference between online and offline ideological segregation (Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2011). Large-scale data analyses such as Barberá et al.’s (2015) study on 3.8 million Twitter users with 150 million tweets revealed a more nuanced picture: ideological segregation exists around political topics, but cross-ideological interactions are more common in nonpolitical events.
	Recent research has tapped into cases where cross-ideological interactions occur but their implications on polarization are still mixed. Bail et al. (2018), for instance, conducted a field experiment exposing participants to cross-ideological content on Twitter, which unexpectedly resulted in a backfire effect, whereby Republicans only become more conservative after exposure and Democrats exhibit an insignificant liberal shift. Consistent with the findings, in an observational study on Twitter’s Birdwatch fact-checking program, Allen et al. (2022) found that partisanship is more predictive, rather than content itself, of whether users flagged tweets as misleading. These findings suggest that well-intentioned efforts to bridge the ideological divides may inadvertently lead to hostile encounters. 
	Contrary to their findings, Broockman and Kalla (2022) reported that incentivizing Fox News viewers to watch CNN led to a moderation in polarized beliefs, as they were exposed to new knowledge uncovered in their usual sources. These conflicting results highlight the complexities of cross-ideological exposure. Based on the literature, the following hypotheses are proposed: 
H2: Twitter users with strong ideologies exhibit stronger ideological homophily compared to ideological moderates.
H3: Twitter users with strong ideologies are less open to different opinions compared to ideological moderates.
**Variables of Interest and Operationalization**
	The goal of the analysis was to assess the correlation between the strength of Twitter users’ ideological stances and three dependent variables: exposure to congruent information, ideological homophily, and openness to different opinions.
	(IV 1) Political ideology was measured by participants’ self-reported political views, ranging from “very conservative” to “very liberal.”
	(DV 1) Exposure to congruent information was measured based on participants’ self-perception of their exposure to opposing political views on Twitter, specifically how many of the political posts they encountered that they disagree with. Responses comprised of five levels, ranging from “None of them” to “Almost all of them.”
	(DV 2) Homophily was operationalized by measuring the participants’ perceived similarity with the politicians they followed. The participants responded to the multiple choice question asking if most of their followed politicians have either similar political beliefs to you, different political beliefs, or a mix of political beliefs.
	(DV 3) Openness to different opinions was comprised of two levels, capturing participants’ responses to the dichotomous question asking whether seeing different points of view is a reason for using Twitter.
